---
authors: Robert Mustacchi <rm@joyent.com>
state: predraft
---

<!--
    This Source Code Form is subject to the terms of the Mozilla Public
    License, v. 2.0. If a copy of the MPL was not distributed with this
    file, You can obtain one at http://mozilla.org/MPL/2.0/.
-->

<!--
    Copyright (c) 2017, Joyent, Inc. 
-->


# RFD 97 Project Hookshot - Improved VLAN Handling

VLANs are a predominant and commonly used aspect of networking. However,
the illumos networking stack does not often behave as well in the face
of VLANs. Many of the behaviors and enhancements in the networking stack
that are used do not apply to VLAN tagged traffic. However, we find that
most of our customers, and even our own deployments, are almost
exclusively filled with networks that leverage VLANs. In part, this is
due to the ease of using VLANs in Triton through NAPI and the simplicity
of `dladm create-vnic -v <vlan>`.

## VLAN Refresher

Before, we delve too deeply, it's worth going over a brief refresher of
what a VLAN is and why it's used. An Ethernet packet has a field called
an Ethertype. This Ethertype is a 16-bit identifier which is used to
indicate the type of packet that is being used. For example, 0x800
indicates an IPv4 packet, 0x806 indicates an ARP packet, and 0x86dd
indicates an IPv6 packet. The following is the breakdown of a typical
packet.

```
+-----------------+-----------+------------+------+
| Ethernet Header | IP Header | TCP Header | Data |
+-----------------+-----------+------------+------+
```

If we break down the Ethernet header, it then looks like:

```
+-------------+---------------+-----------+------+
| 6-byte Dest | 6-byte Source | 2-byte    | Data |
| MAC Address | Mac Address   | Ethertype |      |
+-------------+---------------+-----------+------+
```

VLAN tagged packets are indicated with an Ethertype of 0x8100. When
a VLAN tagged packet is encountered, it indicates that the packet uses a
modified Ethernet header. Following the Ethertype indicating a VLAN,
there are 16-bits used to encode a VLAN ID and priority followed by
16-bits used to encode the actual Ethertype of the actual packet, which
can be any normal Ethertype. The VLAN Ethernet header instead looks
like:

```
+-------------+---------------+-----------+--------+-----------+------+
| 6-byte Dest | 6-byte Source | 2-byte    | 2-byte | 2-byte    | Data |
| MAC Address | Mac Address   | Ethertype | VLAN   | Ethertype |      |
|             |               | 0x8100    | id/pri |           |      |
+-------------+---------------+-----------+--------+-----------+------+
```

Packets that have this VLAN identifier are called tagged packets. This
tagging is standardized in `IEEE 802.1Q`.

Each VLAN identifier represents a unique segment. These can be used to
create independent, virtual networks that all share the same physical
network. Broadcast traffic on one VLAN does not reach another VLAN. This
also means that IP addresses can be reused in different VLANs
(though care still needs to be taken to ensure that there isn't overlap
if Layer 3 routing is involved).

VLANs can interact with the OS (or switch or other network device) in
two different ways:

1. The host OS can be aware of VLANs and explicitly add VLAN tags to
outgoing packets and take them into account when receiving packets.

2. The host OS can be unaware of VLANs and a switch can add VLAN tags to
packets sent by the OS and remove them from packets being deliver to the
OS.

Many switches have rules that say only specific VLANs are allowed to go
in of and out of specific ports. If the switch encounters a packet with
a tag that is not in the list, then it will drop it. A switch may have
additional rules that state a packet that it encounters coming in on a
given port should be rewritten to include a VLAN tag before sending it
out or that when a specific VLAN is encountered, it should remove the
tag before delivering it to the port.

In Triton, both modes are often used. The admin network in Triton is
traditionally an `untagged` or `access-mode` network. Here the OS sends
and receives packets without a VLAN tag; however, the switch is
transparently adding and removing the tags as packets traverse the
network.

Pretty much every other network in Triton is generally a VLAN tagged
network. This means that all packets generated by the network must have
the correct VLAN tag. The VLAN tag is specified in a NAPI network and is
stored in the VM payload. When a VNIC is created, the `-v` option is
used to specify a VLAN tag that indicates what VLAN packets should be
tagged with and received on.

### KVM

All of our KVM guests today operate in a mode similar to the access mode
described above. While the underlying VNIC that a KVM guest can use may
be tagged with a VLAN and thus its packets rewritten by the illumos
networking stack, the guest cannot see any VLANs. In addition, if it
tries to send traffic tagged with a VLAN, it'll end up being dropped.

This facade is maintained by the vnd driver. A KVM zone uses the same
VNIC as any other zone, which may be optionally tagged with a VLAN tag.

## Missing and Desired Functionality

This section goes over what functionality that exists in the stack that
cannot target VLANs and some of the additional follow on effects of
this that we would like to implement, but have not.

### Hardware Ring Polling on VLANs

The MAC driver (aka GLDv3) allows polling on hardware rings that are fully
classified. The polling on a ring is important because of the current
design of MAC. MAC has an inherent high watermark for incoming packets.
If it exceeds that number of outstanding packets on a per-ring basis, it
will transition to polling mode. However, if it cannot transition to
polling mode, then it will drop packets.

This high watermark is intended to make sure that the system does not
end up running out of memory due to filling it with packets faster than
the system can process them. Once you drop a packet, transports like TCP
do not react well and back pressure is applied to the system, thus
slowing down certain aspects of the system.

This ends up creating an artificial limiter on performance of the system
as we end up dealing with dropped packets, which leads to retransmits,
etc. While, devices that have VLANs associated with them may have a
group assigned to them (granting one or more rings), which helps by
providing dedicated resources, MAC does not enable polling.

MAC refuses to enable polling on rings with VLANs associated with them
because it cannot guarantee that the ring is fully filtered. However,
hardware does have the ability to filter on VLANs and filter them to
specific rings. We should explore this functionality and add support for
it to a number of drivers in the GLDv3.

Many of the devices supported by the GLDv3 support this functionality. A
summary of their functionality will be summarized and provided later in
this document in the section `Modern Hardware Capabilities`.

### MAC DLS Bypass and Software Rings

Another useful feature of MAC is called `DLS Bypass`. DLS bypass
basically allows all of the processing that takes place in the DLS
kernel module to be skipped and have frames sent directly to ip_input().
This is generally only enabled for IPv4 TCP and UDP rings when VLANs are
not on the scene. This just adds another unnecessary cost for using
VLANs.

Most of the time this comes from us enabling the poll capability. For
example, see the following stack trace:

```
mac`mac_soft_ring_dls_bypass()
mac`mac_client_poll_enable+0x56(ffffff03d380f038)
dld`dld_capab_poll_enable+0x9b(ffffff03d95f4e48, ffffff000f352a00)
dld`dld_capab_poll+0x45(ffffff03d95f4e48, ffffff000f352a00, 1)
dld`dld_capab+0xa0(ffffff03d95f4e48, 2, ffffff000f352a00, 1)
ip`ill_capability_poll_enable+0x75(ffffff03d6613aa8)
ip`ill_capability_dld_enable+0x68(ffffff03d6613aa8)
ip`ill_capability_dld_ack+0xed(ffffff03d6613aa8, ffffff03d0bf0280, 
ffffff03d0c42260)
ip`ill_capability_dispatch+0xb5(ffffff03d6613aa8, ffffff03d0bf0280, 
ffffff03d0c42260)
ip`ill_capability_ack_thr+0xda(ffffff03d0bf0280)
taskq_d_thread+0xb7(ffffff03cff629d8)
thread_start+8()
```

One complication with this is the fact that we may need to be able to
listen on all VLANs on a given MAC. The problem is that someone can bind
to the VLAN Ethertype, at which point it needs to be able to manage and
handle receiving everything, unlike the filtering.

However, this is a rather _uncommon_ operation. Therefore, it's not
unreasonable to try and do something such that if this happens we end up
going to a slow path. It may also be possible that we can rig this up
with most drivers such that it'll still end up being accepted in the
general ring rather than the specific one. So, we'll need to figure that
out, but it shouldn't be too bad. One way that we may end up being able
to do this is to basically force the underlying datalink to be
promiscuous so that way we don't have to interfere with the normal data
path and treat this as a variant to someone running snoop or other
operations.

#### Software Rings

Software rings in MAC are a means of fanning out the different physical
rings into different buckets and queues that can be processed in
parallel in the system. Today we bucket things into three categories:

* TCP / IPv4
* UDP / IPv4
* Everything else

In general, we should look, especially in the context of the above logic
to figure out if we can always decode the first level of VLAN tag and
share the existing TCP/UDP buckets. These buckets are tied directly into
what the clients are polling on in the above section. This
ring-classification is also a part of the DLS bypass operation.


All in all, both of these should be important and useful. This really
ties into GLDv3 polling on rings and how we end up really driving
packets through the system.

### Explicit VLAN anti-spoofing rules

One thing that might be good to have on the sending side is an explicit
set of VLAN anti-spoofing rules and the ability to potentially allow
additional VLANs that one can send from. This may want to be phrased as
specific VLANs or as MAC, VLAN tuples. While there is some amount of
logic for checking this in MAC today, it isn't quite as strong as the
other anti-spoofing options that we have today.

This implicitly exists today. Focusing on it may end up making it a bit
better for cases where we're trying to virtualize systems and we want to
minimize the number of devices we're virtualizing, while maximizing the
different traffic they can get on a single device. In essence, this
could be similar to the secondary-macs property that we have or look at
even combining the two.

## Modern Hardware Capabilities

There are a couple of different capabilities that we care about
regarding VLANs from hardware. Today most hardware
offers:

  * Filtering traffic to a specific ring
  * Stripping the VLAN tag out of received packets
  * Inserting a VLAN tag into transmitted packets

Based on a brief survey, we know that newer Intel NICs support all of
these behavior in the 10+ Gb form factors. Only the I350 supports the
VLAN filters in this mode.

These filters often operate in one of two different ways to determine
whether or not a given packet should be sent to that specific group:

* They pass one filter and then another filter
* They match a specific tuple

Consider hardware like that supported by the `ixgbe` driver. It has a
separate set of filters for MAC addresses and then a separate set of
filters for VLANs. For a packet to enter a given ring, it must match any
of the MAC filters and then must match any of the VLAN filters. This
could be described roughly in the following pseudocode:

```
for each packet p:
    for each MAC filter m:
        if m matches p's mac:
            for each VLAN filter v:
                if v matches p's vlan:
                    accept p for group 
```

Basically each different kind of filter is treated as an AND and then
it's an OR inside of a filter.

Importantly this is distinct from the tuple-matching kinds of filters.
With these, your first filter is basically matching a specific tuple. So
say the filter provided a tuple based on (mac, vlan), this would look
like:

```
for each packet p:
    for each filter f:
        if f.mac matches p's mac and f.vlan matches p's vlan:
            accept p for group

```

This has ramifications for when we design kernel APIs. We'll need to be
very clear when we're ORing together and when we're ANDing things
together. It's important to be aware of these diverse types as we
evaluate hardware.

The hardware strategies that we need to consider 

| Driver | Ring Filtering | Filter Type | Tagging | Stripping | Notes |
| ------ | -------------- | ----------- | ------- | --------- | ----- |
| Broadcom NetXtreme-C/-E | yes+ |  Tuple+ | yes+ | yes+ | bnxt driver on Linux and FreeBSD |
| bnxe | yes | yes* | yes* | yes* | - |
| cxgbe | yes | Unknown | yes* | yes* | - |
| ixgbe | yes | Separate filters | yes, per packet | yes, per queue | also has global filters |
| igb/e1000g | no | N/A | yes, per packet | yes, per port | Filtering support is available on the I350, but not other models |
| i40e | yes | Both | yes, per packet | yes, per group (VSI) | - |
| QLogic 45000 series | yes | Both | yes, per packet | yes, per group | qede driver on Linux |
| Mellanox Connect-X4 | yes | Unknown | yes* | yes* | Likely applies to other gen products |

A '*' character indicates that we do not know for certain from the
documentation what the granularity of support is. A '+' character
indicates that we believe there is support based on information from
other device drivers; however, we do not have documentation to confirm
that.

While we're thinking about this on a purely per-VLAN basis, we also want
to think about this in terms of tuples that we may want to apply for a
given filter.

## New Interfaces

### GLDv3 Interface Changes

I'd like to propose a series of new additions to the GLDv3 interfaces
for rings and groups. These proposals are variants of what exist today,
designed to take into account some of the aspects of what we've talked
about already. To facilitate this, manual pages that describe these new
interfaces have been written up and existing manual pages have been
modified.

In the next subsection we'll go through all of the new and modified
manual pages. Afterwards, we'll go through and highlight key differences
between what exists in the code base today for rings and groups and what
we're proposing here.

The intent of this phase isn't to immediately jump to stabilization, but
to get something that makes it easier for us to start working with IHVs
and updating drivers ourselves to take care of these new interfaces,
with the understanding that as this evolves, things may change.

Note, a number of things will be called out as existing but not
documented. This is because they may not provide value at this time or
we may want to consider how we we define them more.

#### Manual Pages

The core of the documentation can be found in the
[mac_capab_rings(9E)](./man/mac_capab_rings.9e.pdf) manual page.
However, all of the new and modified manual pages are important.

New Manual pages:

* [mac_capab_rings(9E)](./man/mac_capab_rings.9e.pdf)
* [mac_filter(9E)](./man/mac_filter.9e.pdf) - This defines all of the
filter entry points.
* [mgi_start(9E) and mgi_stop(9E)](./man/mgi_start.9e.pdf)
* [mi_enable(9E) and mi_disable(9E)](./man/mi_enable.9e.pdf)
* [mr_gget(9E)](./man/mr_gget.9e.pdf)
* [mr_rget(9E)](./man/mr_rget.9e.pdf)
* [mri_poll(9E)](./man/mri_poll.9e.pdf)
* [mri_start(9E)](./man/mri_start.9e.pdf)
* [mri_stat(9E)](./man/mri_stat.9e.pdf)
* [mac_group_info(9s)](./man/mac_group_info.9s.pdf)
* [mac_intr(9s)](./man/mac_intr.9s.pdf)
* [mac_ring_info(9s)](./man/mac_ring_info.9s.pdf)

Manual pages with new functions added to them:
* `mri_tx` was added to [mc_tx(9E)](./man/mc_tx.9e.pdf)
* `mac_rx_ring` was added to [mac_rx(9f)](./man/mac_rx.9f.pdf)
* `mac_tx_ring_update` was added to [mac_tx_update(9f)](./man/mac_tx_update.9f.pdf)

Modified existing manual pages:

* [mac(9E)](./man/mac.9e.pdf)
* [mc_unicst(9E)](./man/mc_unicst.9e.pdf)
* [mac_callbacks(9s)](./man/mac_callbacks.9s.pdf)

All manual pages in one PDF are available [here](./man/all.pdf).

#### Changes

This section represents proposed concrete changes to the existing structures.

##### Structure Extensibility

We'd like to make sure that the structures that we're passing in as
capabilities have some amount of extensibility. Rather than using the
strict version numbering that is used elsewhere, we'd like to propose an
extensions member which is the first member of the structure.

The idea here is that the OS would set bits that it supports and then
the driver would and that with the things that it supports. This is a
variant of the strategy used by the mc_callbacks member of the
mac_callbacks_t structure. By treating it as a feature negotiation, this
allows us to even change the structure entirely with additional bits in
the future. This is based on some of the work that was done in [RFD 89
Project Tiresias](../0089).

In addition, we've gone ahead and reserved a uint_t of flags as the
second member of each structure to allow us to have a more capabilities
like set of flags if we want to indicat that they support various
features along the way. One example of this would be having a driver
declare that it supports VLAN tagging and stripping.

This impacts the `MAC_CAPAB_RINGS` capabililty structure, the
`mac_group_info_t` structure and the `mac_ring_info_t` structure. These
are discussed in [mac_capab_rings(9E)](./man/mac_capab_rings.9e.pdf),
[mac_group_info(9S)](./man/mac_group_info.9s.pdf), and
[mac_ring_info(9S)](./man/mac_ring_info.9s.pdf) respectively.

#### MAC and VLAN Filtering

We'd like to make sure that we had some kind of VLAN filtering that we
can add to the group API. Today, the current functions for MAC filters
look like:

```
typedef int (*mac_add_mac_addr_t)(void *driver, const uint8_t *mac)
typedef int (*mac_rem_mac_addr_t)(void *driver, const uint8_t *mac)
```

Earlier we talked about the different ways of specifying filters. Over
time, I suspect we're going to want more and more advanced filters;
however, it's important to note the tie between MAC and VLAN pairs. To
that end, I think the following function signatures should be added 

```
typedef int (*mac_add_mac_addr_t)(mac_group_driver_t driver, const uint8_t *mac,
    uint_t flags)
typedef int (*mac_rem_mac_addr_t)(mac_group_driver_t driver, const uint8_t *mac,
    uint_t flags)
typedef int (*mac_add_vlan_t)(mac_group_driver_t driver, uint16_t vlan, uint_t flags)
typedef int (*mac_rem_vlan_t)(mac_group_driver_t driver, uint16_t vlan, uint_t flags)
typedef int (*mac_add_mv_filter_t)(mac_group_driver_t driver, const uint8_t *mac,
    uint16_t vlan, uint_t flags);
typedef int (*mac_rem_mv_filter_t)(mac_group_driver_t driver, const uint8_t *mac,
    uint16_t vlan, uint_t flags);
```

The idea with these functions is that they allow us to add one of the
following three things:

1. A MAC-only filter that should be logically ORed with all the other
MAC filters. 

2. A VLAN-only filter that should be logically ORed with all other VLAN
filters.

3. A MAC, VLAN match filter. This should be logically ORed with all
other MAC, VLAN match filters.

The driver will be able to indicate whether it supports MAC, VLAN, or
MAC/VLAN tuple filters. If the driver supports more than one of the
filter options, then the documentation will indicate that the driver
should logically and between the filters.

A driver should either support the separate filters or the tuple. We'll
make it an error when registering the capability if it supports both.

One other thing to point out is that we added a flags argument that will
likely be 0 by default. This is really to allow us to extend things
in the future if there are arguments we want to add, for example, like
tagging and stripping VLAN information.

This can be found in greater detail in the `Filters` section in
[mac_capab_rings(9E)](./man/mac_capab_rings.9e.pdf). In addition, the
changes to the `mac_group_t` structure can be found in
[mac_group_info(9S)](./man/mac_group_info.9s.pdf).

##### Ring Polling

Today, ring polling provides a single limit, which is the number of
bytes that should be polled by the driver. Currently this is a signed
value; however, negative values have no meaning and in fact, some
drivers ASSERT that it is not negative. We should likely change this to
a `size_t` and then also consider adding a third argument which
indicates the total number of bytes that should be polled.

It is still an open question as to whether or not we should introduce
the third argument; however, changing the function signature seems like
an important change. While there's no intention at this time of
supporting a larger than INT32\_MAX value, it might elimiate a class of
things that drivers writers may worry about to be truly defensive.

##### mac_register_t changes

Today, the `mac_register_t` structure has a member `m_v12n` which is
used to try and determine whether or not it should even ask the driver
about caps and shares. This member doesn't seem to provide any value as
something that a driver has to specify. I propose that drivers should
not have to specify it and it should be ignored. Drivers will simply be
asked about both `MAC_CAPAB_RIONGS` and `MAC_CAPAB_SHARES` which was the
other thing that this was intended to support.

##### Dynamic MAC Groups

The existing MAC framework has a notion of both static and dynamic
groups. Static groups have a fixed mapping between rings and groups.
Most drivers that support rings use the static mapping. The only
expection is the `nxge` driver. Dynamic groups baiscally allow a ring to
be placed in any group and in fact require that every ring be able to be
placed in every group.

##### mac\_group\_t mgi\_intr member member

The `mac_group_t` structure has a `mac_intr_t` member embedded as its
`mgi_intr` member. At this time, this member has not been documented as
it's not clear that most drivers have a use for it. From my rough
understanding, it allows some group-level interrupt management and
synchronization; however, it doesn't really seem to be used by drivers
in general.

At this time, I wouldn't remove it, but I would not endorse its use.


#### Open Questions

This section represents open questions that we still have on the current
proposed design.  Some of these, like the `mac_intr_t` we should answer
sooner rather than later.

##### mac_intr_t

The mac_ring_info_t structure presents an interesting conundrum as its a
fixed size structure that is embedded inside of the mac_ring_info_t and
mac_group_info_t structures. There are a few different options here.

1. Transform the mac_ring_info_t and mac_group_info_t structures into
having pointers to the mac_intr_t structures.

2. Deal with them in the same extensibility format as we described
above as part of the other structures.

I believe option one will be better in the long-term. It will cause more
churn in existing drivers in the gate; hwoever, now seems the time to
pay this cost.

##### MAC ring driver argument normalization

Today, there exists a type called the `mac_ring_driver_t`. This value is
set based on filling in rings. While some of the function callbacks use
and leverage this, not all of them do. Importantly, neither the
`mri_send` or `mri_poll` entry points do. I propose that while we're
here, we normalize this such that they all either use the same `void *`
or use the `mac_ring_driver_t`. I do not have a strong preference
towards one or the other and would welcome feedback as to what approach
we should take.

##### VLAN Tagging and Stripping

It's worth starting to think about tagging and stripping in the context
of this and how we would evolve this. I think that we would start by
introducing two flags that we could assign on the group information
structure:

1. `MAC_RING_STRIP_VLAN`
2. `MAC_RING_INSERT_VLAN`

`MAC_RING_STRIP_VLAN` flag indicates that the hardware has the
capability to strip the VLAN tags when receiving frames on a given
group. We might leverage this by then passing a flag requesting it on
the different VLAN filter entry points.

The `MAC_RING_INSERT_VLAN` flag indicates that the hardware has the
capability to insert a VLAN tag when transmitting frames on the
given group. It's less clear how this would fit into the broader
transmit framework. For example, we may want to treat this like the
checksum information and store it on a per-mblk basis or we may want to
just say that we'll use this on a fully classified ring.

While neither of these is required at this time, it's useful to think
through what features like these may look like.
