---
authors: Sean Chittenden <seanc@joyent.com>
state: predraft
---

<!--
    This Source Code Form is subject to the terms of the Mozilla Public
    License, v. 2.0. If a copy of the MPL was not distributed with this
    file, You can obtain one at http://mozilla.org/MPL/2.0/.
-->

<!--
    Copyright 2017 Joyent, Inc.

    README.md is autogenerated from README.rst and SHOULD NOT be edited by hand!
-->

# RFD 106 Engineering Guide - Go Best Practices

> "Go is efficient, scalable, and productive. Some programmers find it
> fun to work in; others find it unimaginative, even boring. In this
> article we will explain why those are not contradictory positions. Go
> was designed to address the problems faced in software development at
> Google, which led to a language that is not a breakthrough research
> language but is nonetheless an excellent tool for engineering large
> software projects."
>
> — [Rob Pike, 2012](https://talks.golang.org/2012/splash.article)

Introduction
------------

Joyent has [a](http://dtrace.org/blogs/wesolows/2014/12/29/fin/)
[storied](http://dtrace.org/blogs/wesolows/2014/12/29/golang-is-trash/)
[history](https://golang.org/pkg/net/#hdr-Name_Resolution) with regards
to [Go](https://github.com/golang/go/issues/20603). Without providing
modern treatment to past issues, it is undeniable that many, if not most
(as of 2017) distributed systems are being written in Go. To that
extent, Joyent is embracing of Go's contribution to enterprise computing
because the software engineering ethos held by many in the Go community
are aligned with our beliefs and
[principles](https://gist.github.com/davepacheco/1878bad488053093348d9ec9967f5b06).

In this document we will define and articulate Joyent's evolving set of
best-practices with regards to how to Go.

Each item has a recommendation and a rationale. Over time these
recommendations and rationale are apt to change and added. This document
makes use of terminology defined in BCP 14 (RFC 2119 and RFC 8174, i.e.
"MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD
NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL").

### Core Beliefs

At Joyent we have the following beliefs regarding software:

-   Build robust, trusted systems
    -   Build secure systems
    -   Data integrity
-   Operability
-   Maintainability
-   Availability
-   Debuggablity

It's not possible to prescribe a fool-proof set of best-practices but it
is possible to influence the outcome. To wit, in order to satisfy these
beliefs, we take principled stances on the following (in no particular
order, but roughly ordered from philosophical to practical):

-   Version of Go
-   Project Structure
-   Workflow
-   Style
-   `$EDITOR` Integration
-   `vendor/` Management
-   Naming Conventions
-   API stability
-   Static Analysis
-   Explicit Types
-   Return Parameters
-   Interface Receivers
-   `const`
-   Bitmasks
-   Documentation
-   Context

Beliefs
-------

### Build Robust, Trusted Systems

#### Security

#### Data Integrity

### Operability

### Maintainability

### Availability

### Debuggablity

Principles
----------

### Version of Go

#### Version of Go: Recommendation

1.  You SHOULD use the latest released version of Go.
2.  You MUST use a released version of Go for building released
    binaries. You SHOULD use the latest version of Go for release
    engineering.
3.  You MAY use `master` for development or Continuous Integration (CI)
    testing.
4.  You MUST remove `$GOPATH/pkg` every time you change versions of
    `go(1)`\_.

The following tools are RECOMMENDED for development:

1.  `goimports(1)`\_:

        $ go get -u golang.org/x/tools/cmd/goimports

2.  `guru(1)`\_:

        $ go get -u golang.org/x/tools/cmd/guru

3.  `gorename(1)`\_:

        $ go get -u golang.org/x/tools/cmd/gorename

#### Version of Go: Rationale

### Project Structure

#### Project Structure: Recommendation

1.  `$GOPATH` SHOULD be set to `$HOME/go` and SHOULD be incorporated
    into your shell's environment [^1].
2.  All development SHOULD be done within `$GOPATH/src`.
3.  `$GOPATH/bin` SHOULD be part of `PATH` and before `/usr/local` or
    `/opt/local` (i.e. before system or package manager managed
    binaries).

        $ export GOPATH=$HOME/go
        $ export PATH=$GOPATH/bin:$PATH

4.  Where appropriate, it is RECOMMENDED to make use of monolithic
    repositories (mono-repo).
5.  Publicly consumable libraries or programs SHOULD be pushed to a
    distinct canonical public location and automatically synchronized to
    the internal codebase.

#### Project Structure: Rationale

In Go 1.8, the Go project defaulted to `$HOME/go` as the default value
for `$GOPATH`. Use of one-workspace per project is counter-productive
and establishes a workflow that is orthogonal to the ethos of the
prevailing Go ecosystem. This isn't to say there are times where this is
necessary (i.e. clean-room verification or maintenance of `vendor/`),
but the default practice SHOULD be to work inside of a single `$GOPATH`
workspace [^2].

Go's tooling makes it especially productive to move all libraries and
programs into the same codebase so that refactoring can commence in
atomic units of work. In particular, making sweeping changes via
`gofmt(1)`\_ `-r` is easy to accomplish in a single repository and
commit. Breaking apart individual libraries into discrete repositories
fragments the codebase with no isolation guarantees that Version Control
System (VCS) doesn't already provide. Contrast that with having all
libraries and programs in the same codebase, it is now possible to move
the entire codebase forward in an atomic transaction [^3]. Additional
arguments in support of monorepos include:

-   [3.5 Years, 500k Lines of Go (Part
    1)](https://npf.io/2017/03/3.5yrs-500k-lines-of-go/)
-   [Go in a
    Monorepo](https://blog.gopheracademy.com/advent-2015/go-in-a-monorepo/)
-   [Basic Project Design in
    Go](https://hackernoon.com/basic-monorepo-design-in-go-e9ba1cb8e4e6)
-   [Building and testing Go apps + monorepo +
    speed](https://medium.com/wattpad-engineering/building-and-testing-go-apps-monorepo-speed-9e9ca4978e19)
-   [Dependencies in Golang
    projects](https://medium.com/@LucasVieiraDev/dependencies-in-golang-projects-f46a11fef832)
-   [Pros and Cons: Golang in a
    Monorepo](http://pliutau.com/pros_and_cons_golang_in_monorepo/)

Publicly reusable components, however, SHOULD be discretely usable.

### Workflow

#### Workflow: Recommendation

Engineer workflow changes based on whether or not you have
write-privileges to the target repository.

If you HAVE write access to a repository and it is Github-like:

1.  Checkout the repository:

        $ go get -d my.git.server/my_org/my_project

2.  Create a branch for your change:

        $ cd $GOPATH/src/my.git.server/my_org/my_project
        $ git checkout -b my-branch-name

3.  Commit your change(s):

        $ git commit

4.  Push your change to `origin`:

        $ git push -u origin my-branch-name

5.  Submit a Pull Request (PR).
6.  You SHOULD obtain a review. For all changes deemed to be trivial
    this is not necessary, however the change MUST be made through a PR
    in order to to aid in a quick backout commit.
7.  Automated regression tests MUST complete and pass.
8.  If the velocity of change for the repository is low enough, a
    `CHANGELOG` entry for the project SHOULD be committed to the PR as
    the final step before merging the PR. If the velocity of the
    repository is too high, the `CHANGELOG` entry for the project MAY be
    added after the PR has been merged.
9.  Merge the PR. If the history of the PR is messy with unhelpful
    commits (e.g. "fix typo", "update test"), perform a squash merge
    with a detailed, high-quality commit message that has been approved
    by the rest of the team. Detail that can't be expressed in the
    commit message should be outlined in code comments.
10. Pull the latest changes:

        $ git checkout master && git pull origin master

11. Delete your local branch:

        $ git branch -d my-branch-name

12. Delete your branch from the server (e.g. `my-branch-name`).

If you do NOT HAVE write access to a repository the workflow is largely
the same except you MUST create a fork of the repository:

1.  Checkout the original repository:

        $ go get -d -v my.git.server/my_org/my_project

2.  Fork the upstream repository to your individual user account.
3.  Add the remote for your repository:

        $ cd $GOPATH/src/my.git.server/my_org/my_project
        $ git remote add me my.git.server/my_user/my_project

4.  Create a branch for your change:

        $ git checkout -b my-branch-name

5.  Commit your change(s)
6.  Push your change to `me`:

        $ git push -u me my-branch-name

7.  A `CHANGELOG` entry SHOULD be incorporated into the PR unless the
    upstream project will write the `CHANGELOG` entry for you.
8.  Submit a Pull Request (PR).
9.  Wait for the upstream provider to merge your PR.
10. Pull the latest changes:

        $ git checkout master
        $ git pull origin master

11. Delete your local branch:

        $ git branch -d my-branch-name

> **important**
>
> Work MUST be completed within the same directory as the upstream
> :   source (i.e. CORRECT:
>     `$GOPATH/src/my.git.server/upstream_org/my_project`, WRONG:
>     `$GOPATH/src/my.git.server/my_user/my_project`).
>
If you HAVE write access to a repository and it is Gerrit-like:

1.  Checkout the repository:

        $ git clone --origin gerrit https://my.git.server/my_org/my_project.git

2.  Create a branch for your change:

        $ git checkout -b my-branch-name

3.  Commit your change(s):

        $ git commit

4.  Push your change to `origin`:

        $ git push gerrit HEAD:refs/for/master

5.  You MUST obtain a review.
6.  Automated regression tests MUST complete and pass.
7.  A `CHANGELOG` entry MUST be committed to the PR as the final step
    before merging the PR.
8.  Merge the PR. If the history of the PR is messy with unhelpful
    commits (e.g. "fix typo", "update test"), perform a squash merge
    with a detailed, high-quality commit message that has been approved
    by the rest of the team. Detail that can't be expressed in the
    commit message should be outlined in code comments.
9.  Pull the latest changes:

        $ git checkout master
        $ git pull origin master

10. Delete your local branch:

        $ git branch -d my-branch-name

### Style

#### Style: Recommendation

1.  All code MUST pass through `gofmt(1)`\_. `gofmt(1)`\_ SHOULD be
    executed with the `-s` flag.
2.  Lines SHOULD wrap at 80 characters.

#### Style: Rationale

The particular brand of [tribal fascism that extends from
`gofmt(1)`\_](https://blog.golang.org/go-fmt-your-code) increases the
overall productivity of the entire Go community by creating a single
dialect of Go that is universal across projects, teams, and
organizations. Being able to drop into any arbitrary Go project,
regardless of the copyright, and be able to understand the codebase
quickly is a universal boon.

The only observable consequence to adhering to `gofmt(1)`\_'s set of
style norms is the cost of shedding the sentimental attachment to a
preference for "my way of doing things". Developing a personal or
project-wide coding style takes discipline to adhere to, an
understanding of the style guide's rules (including their rationale),
and an eagle-eye to enforce. Investment in such skills and the pride
attached to that skill-set is near-zero in the Go community. Shedding
personal preference - justified or not - in favor of a prescribed
doctrine is a tangible hurdle to overcome.

> **note**
>
> The computing industry has been well served by project-wide style
> guidelines in part because this created a sufficiently high barrier to
> entry which acted as a litmus-test to ensure tribal norms were
> understood and communicated to new members of the tribe. With many of
> the original industrial programming languages being riddled with
> undefined behavior (e.g. C or C++), style guides helped communities of
> engineers ship more reliable code and with fewer bugs because
> project-wide idioms had a tendency to be put in place for a reason.
>
> Even before `go(1)`\_ adopted `gofmt(1)`\_ to enforce Go's
> single-style guideline, `ident(1)` existed as a crude tool for
> enforcing style (crude to the point that `ident(1)` was eschewed
> because it was unable to perform at the levels required for a
> developer tool). In no way should `clang-format(1)`\_ or
> `clang-tidy(1)`\_ be lumped into the same league of correctness as
> `ident(1)` because `clang-format(1)`\_ and `clang-tidy(1)`\_ [^4]
> recreate the AST before rewriting code (vs the brute-force text-level
> tokenization performed by most `ident(1)` implementations).
>
> The value and merit of individual or project preferences with regards
> to the artistry stemming from style guides has been eclipsed by the
> value generated from participating in the open, code-sharing world of
> the Go Open Source ecosystem. Go came into the world with a lack of
> legacy, fragmentation, or tribalism and has largely remained an
> unfragmented community in large part due to its fungability of both Go
> developers and code that can be readily shared across either projects
> or organizations.

`gofmt(1)`\_ SHOULD be used in place of the `go(1)`\_ tool's `fmt`
command because:

1.  `gofmt(1)`\_ supports the `-s` flag to [simplify code where
    possible](https://golang.org/cmd/gofmt/#hdr-The_simplify_command).
2.  `go fmt` calls `gofmt(1)`: [src/cmd/go/internal/fmtcmd/fmt.go
    L42-L71](https://github.com/golang/go/blob/af2ac47/src/cmd/go/internal/fmtcmd/fmt.go#L42-L71)
3.  `gofmt(1)`\_ supports programmatic rewriting of the code base via
    the `-r` flag.
4.  Code SHOULD be fungible. Go's simple syntax, emphasis on
    readability, and "side-effect"-free code largely make this a
    reality.

Additional rationale is included in [Robert Griesemer's talk on The
Cultural Evolution of
gofmt](https://talks.golang.org/2015/gofmt-en.slide).

### `$EDITOR` Integration

#### `$EDITOR` Integration: Recommendation

This section is NOT making a recommendation regarding any particular
`$EDITOR`. This section is, however making a strong recommendation that
your `$EDITOR` include the following integrations in order to aid in
maximal productivity:

1.  `goimports(1)`\_ is SHOULD be added as a save hook. `$EDITOR`
    instructions are found at:
    [](https://godoc.org/golang.org/x/tools/cmd/goimports)
2.  `guru(1)`\_ SHOULD be integrated into your `$EDITOR` as a plugin.
    Binding "jump-to-definition" to an easy-to-access keybinding is
    strongly RECOMMENDED. Instructions can be found at:
    [](http://golang.org/s/using-guru)
3.  `gorename(1)`\_ SHOULD be integrated into your `$EDITOR` as a plugin
    (instructions for
    [emacs](https://github.com/dominikh/go-mode.el/blob/master/go-rename.el#L13-L17),
    [vim](https://github.com/fatih/vim-go)).
4.  `gofmt(1)`\_ MAY be added as an optional save hook, specifically
    `gofmt -w -s $FILE`.

Specific editor integrations (alpha sorted):

-   `emacs` users SHOULD look at
    [go-mode.el](https://github.com/dominikh/go-mode.el) and MAY
    OPTIONALLY investigate integrating
    [gocode](https://github.com/nsf/gocode)
-   `JetBrains` users SHOULD look at
    [Gogland](https://www.jetbrains.com/go/)
-   `vim` users SHOULD look at [vim-go](https://github.com/fatih/vim-go)
    and MAY OPTIONALLY investigate integrating
    [gocode](https://github.com/nsf/gocode)

### `vendor/` Management

#### `vendor/` Management: Recommendation

1.  Forked and cached libraries in `vendor/` MUST be managed via the
    `dep(1)`\_ tool.
2.  In a monorepo, whomever wants to update a `vendor/`'ed library MAY
    update the version, however they MUST:
    a.  take responsibility for making the change (and updating code as
        necessary)
    b.  testing the change
    c.  communicate the change with consumers of the library
    d.  receive approval from teams receiving the update.

#### `vendor/` Management: Rationale

As of July 2017, `dep(1)`\_ is on track to becoming the community
defacto `vendor/` management tool according to their
[roadmap](https://github.com/golang/dep/wiki/Roadmap). If a project is
using either [godep](https://github.com/tools/godep) (`dep(1)`\_ is not
the same as `godep`!!!) or
[govendor](https://github.com/kardianos/govendor) please make plans to
upgrade to `dep(1)`\_.

### Naming Conventions

#### Naming Conventions: Recommendations

1.  Software SHOULD conform to the following recommendations:
    a.  [Package Names](https://blog.golang.org/package-names)
    b.  [Effective Go](https://golang.org/doc/effective_go.html#names)
    c.  [Organizing Go Code](https://blog.golang.org/organizing-go-code)

    d\. [Organizing Go Code](https://talks.golang.org/2014/organizeio.slide)
2.  All packages SHOULD adhere to the above guidelines. Package authors
    MAY deviate from these conventions if they have sought feedback from
    engineers who have sufficient experience writing libraries.
3.  Package import paths SHOULD use the canonical, public import path
    where possible (i.e. if this is a Joyent public library, use
    `go.joyent.engineering/my_library` and not
    `github.com/joyent/my_library` - use a different `git(1)`\_
    `remote`).
4.  Package aliases SHOULD be used when necessary and there are two
    libraries with the same package name.
5.  Programs SHOULD NOT explicitly `import` a package into the current
    namespace (i.e. do not use `import . "lib/math" Sin`).
6.  Programs MAY import a package for their side effects using the black
    identifier (i.e. a package's `init()` MUST run). For example:

        import (
          database/sql"

          _ "github.com/lib/pq"
        )

#### Naming Conventions: Rationale

Naming is one of the hard things in software. The package semantics of
Go help with this dilemma and minimize the blast-radius of poorly chosen
names. [The burden for good naming and exported functions falls on
library
authors](https://github.com/joyent/triton-go/pull/19#issuecomment-308860337).

### API Stability

#### API Stability: Recommendation

1.  APIs within a single project SHOULD use tightly-coupled function
    signatures.
2.  Refactoring APIs within a single project SHOULD use `gofmt(1)`\_'s
    `-r` to migrate function signatures.
3.  External APIs that are loosely coupled across projects SHOULD use
    `struct` inputs. For example:

        package mypkg
        struct MyFuncInputs {
          ArgA string
          ArgB int
          ArgC bool
        }
        func MyFunc(args MyFuncInputs) {
          // ...
        }

    on the caller's side:

        mypkg.MyFunc(MyFuncInput{
          ArgA: "foo",
          ArgB: 0xba72,
          Argc: true,
        })

4.  Required arguments SHOULD be extracted from the input struct.
5.  Optional arguments or parameters that are subject to change by the
    authors of the library SHOULD be included in the input struct in
    order to provide loose coupling between the library and its
    consumers.

#### API Stability: Rationale

Tightly coupled interfaces within the same project SHOULD be treated as
local. The onus for maintaining the API MUST be on the author changing
the function signature. Tools that programmatically rewrite the codebase
SHOULD be employed to make the change. The entire change SHOULD be
pushed as a single commit. Sweeping mechanical changes SHOULD be
committed independent of either functional or behavioral changes.

External APIs that are loosely coupled where consumers of a library are
apt to not update all of their call sites need to acknowledge that it is
a maintenance cost to enforce tight coupling between a project and an
external library. Use of `struct` input arguments allows:

1.  library maintainer to advance the functionality of their library
    independently
2.  consumers of the library to update without fear of breaking their
    API

> **note**
>
> This recommendation stems from the following hypothetical:
>
> Imagine a function signature is:
>
>     func MyFunc(a string, b int) { /* .. */ }
>
> and the authors of `MyFunc()` decide the function signature needs to
> be updated to:
>
>     func MyFunc(a string, b int, c bool) { /* .. */ }
>
> All consumers of `MyFunc()` must update to the new signature. In some
> cases this compile-time breakage may be desirable in order for
> `MyFunc()`'s authors to communicate a breaking change or semantic
> change that requires some level of understanding by the consumer. In
> other cases, the authors of `MyFunc()` may have added new
> functionality without changing the semantic meaning of the contract
> API. In the latter case, adding functionality to `MyFunc()` requires
> source-code level API flexibility with a permissive interfaces in
> order to minimize the maintenance cost incurred by consumers.
>
> This could be achieved by adding a third function argument,
> `MyFunc(a string, b int, args ...interface{})`, but that approach
> would require runtime checking of `args` and would eschews
> compile-time safety guarantees (and subsequent optimizations). If the
> consumers of `MyFunc()` span team or organizational boundaries, it is
> effectively impossible to force callers to update their interface to
> match the new function signature.
>
> This, the third option is to introduce a static signature:
>
>     type MyFuncOptionalInputs struct {}
>     func MyFunc(aRequired string, bRequired int, MyFuncOptinoalInputs{}) {
>       //
>     }
>
> This static function signature acknowledges `aRequired` and
> `bRequired` as required arguments while allowing the author to extend
> the API in the future by updating and adding to the
> `MyFuncOptionalInputs` struct definition (style note: use
> `MyFuncInputs` as the name of the type and NOT `MyFuncOptionalInputs`:
> the `*Optional*` component to the type name is included for
> illustritive purposes only).

If an API is performance sensitive, this approach MAY NOT be
appropriate. Use of this technique is an exercise in forethought where
the cost of maintenance can not be burdned by the author is weighed
against the theoretical performance impact of passing an optional struct
input to a function. It is difficult to imagine the case where the
execution cost of thousands of requests per second would outweigh the
engineering burden of maintaining a frequently updated or loosely
coupled interface that spans repositories.

This technique must adhere to similar rules as those suggested when
[updating A protobuf message
type](https://developers.google.com/protocol-buffers/docs/proto3#updating),
notably:

-   `*Input` struct member names are permanent and MUST NOT change or
    have their meaning altered in a way that changes their contract.
-   Obsolete `*Input` struct member names MUST:

    a.  be automatically mapped to an updated struct member(s)
    b.  ignored (a discouraged practice)
    c.  removed thereby explicitly breaking any existing code
    d.  never be reused for the life of the interface (and therefore the
        `*Input` struct.

    A phased approach to evolving a `*Input` struct is an acceptable
    strategy.

Again, this is a recommended technique for providing stable interfaces
where the runtime and diminished readability has been weighed against
the cost of maintenance (most notably engineering time or runtime
breakage).

### Static Analysis

#### Static Analysis: Recommendations

1.  Use and integration of "baseline static analysis checks" SHOULD be
    integrated into the Continuous Integration (CI).
2.  An inventory of "optional static analysis checks" is RECOMMENDED but
    not necessary for a second tier of checks to be added to list of
    suggested static analysis checks (e.g. "noisy, but useful" or
    "mostly accurate, but still throws false-positives").

#### Static Analysis: Rationale

`reviewdog`\_ stands out as a pragmatic way to [programmatically raise
the bar of quality within a given Go
project](https://medium.com/@haya14busa/reviewdog-a-code-review-dog-who-keeps-your-codebase-healthy-d957c471938b)
by automatically executing and providing inline annotations in PRs with
the results of baseline checks. If a particular type of error occurs
more than a few times, write a static analysis check and incorporate it
into `reviewdog`\_.

For offline development, use of `gometalinter(1)`\_ is RECOMMENDED:

    $ go get -u github.com/alecthomas/gometalinter
    $ gometalinter --install

Regardless of the tool, incorporating a baseline of static analysis of
commonly identified issues frees up reviewers to focus on the content of
change versus the mechanics of the change. Time invested in static
analysis checks usually pays dividends with respect to preventing bugs
(e.g. [scopelint](https://github.com/kyoh86/scopelint), [go tool vet
--shadow](https://golang.org/cmd/vet/#hdr-Shadowed_variables),
[errcheck](https://github.com/kisielk/errcheck),
[safesql](https://github.com/stripe/safesql),
[staticcheck](https://github.com/dominikh/go-tools/tree/master/cmd/staticcheck)
), reducing sub-optimal code (e.g.
[ineffassign](https://github.com/gordonklaus/ineffassign),
[unparam](https://github.com/mvdan/unparam)), or reducing engineering
time wasted pointing out nits that could be identified consistently by
bots (e.g. [go vet](https://golang.org/cmd/vet/),
[lll](https://github.com/walle/lll) (long line linter),
[misspell](https://github.com/client9/misspell)).

Several recommended static analysis checks include (most come from
`gometalinter(1)`\_, alpha-sorted):

-   [deadcode](https://github.com/tsenart/deadcode)
-   [errcheck](https://github.com/kisielk/errcheck)
-   [golint](https://github.com/golang/lint/golint)
-   [gosimple](https://honnef.co/go/tools/cmd/gosimple)
-   [ineffassign](https://github.com/gordonklaus/ineffassign)
-   [lll (Long Line Linter)](https://github.com/walle/lll)
-   [misspell](https://github.com/client9/misspell/cmd/misspell)
-   [safesql](https://github.com/stripe/safesql)
-   [scopelint](https://github.com/kyoh86/scopelint)
-   [staticcheck](https://honnef.co/go/tools/cmd/staticcheck)
-   [unconvert](https://github.com/mdempsky/unconvert)
-   [unparam](https://github.com/mvdan/unparam)
-   [unused](https://honnef.co/go/tools/cmd/unused)
-   [varcheck](https://github.com/opennota/check/tree/master/cmd/varcheck)
-   [vet](https://golang.org/cmd/vet/)

Several optional linters include (alpha-sorted):

-   [aligncheck](https://github.com/opennota/check/cmd/aligncheck)
-   [go-structlayout](https://github.com/dominikh/go-structlayout)
-   [goconst](https://github.com/jgautheron/goconst)
-   [structcheck](https://github.com/opennota/check/cmd/structcheck)
-   [usedexports](https://github.com/jgautheron/usedexports)

### Explicit Types

#### Explicit Types: Recommendation

1.  Explicit types SHOULD be used within a project.
2.  Libraries or public APIs MAY export types where it helps
    readability.
3.  Where the meaning or intent of a fundamental type would benefit from
    explicit type checking by the compiler, explicit types SHOULD be
    used.
4.  [Type Conversions](https://golang.org/ref/spec#Conversions) SHOULD
    be deferred as long as reasonable.
5.  Where explicitly typed variables are employed, the lifecycle of
    identifiers referencing underlying types SHOULD be reduced to the
    smallest reasonable scope possible.
6.  Use of `gorename(1)`\_ to maintain `type` names is RECOMMENDED. The
    RECOMMENDED use of `gorename(1)`\_ extends to all package, function,
    and method members (i.e. `const`, `func`, `var`, and `type`).

#### Explicit Types: Rationale

Go is an [explicitly typed language](https://golang.org/ref/spec#Types).
The compiler does not perform any implicit type conversions of [named
types](https://golang.org/ref/spec#Type_identity). Exported functions,
`interface`s, and types SHOULD make use of explicit types in order to
enable the compiler to detect and enforce a pacakge's specified type
system. It is NOT RECOMMENDED to deprive the compiler of the necessary
type information it requires in order to prevent developers from
incorrectly and abusively overloading Go's underlying types (e.g.
`string` vs `RandomStringID`, or `uint64` vs `inode`).

As an example, a `string` SHOULD be thought of as an immutable [slice of
runes](https://golang.org/ref/spec#String_types) that is missing its
type information (i.e. a `string` is a container, not a type).

Go's fundamental or underlying types (e.g. `string`, `int*`, `[]byte`)
are containers that crudely answer the question "how is a variable going
to be stored efficiently." Use of underlying types do not answer the
question "what bits are in a given container." [Go does not permit any
implicit type conversions of named
types](https://golang.org/ref/spec#Type_declarations).

Go's explicit type system prevents variables backed by the same
underlying type from fraternizing. Use of fundamental types at formal
interface boundaries is discouraged because use of variable names to
indicate the intended use of a variable is only enforced by the reader,
not by the compiler. If variable names are sufficient to guard against
variable misues, you MAY rely on variable names to convey type
information.

Where type intent information SHOULD be enforced by the compiler, use of
explicit types is RECOMMENDED. The Go type system is a compile-time
cost, not a runtime cost. Use types.

Examples:

    type ID uint64
    type ID string
    type CookieID string
    type UUID []byte
    type Index uint
    type Key string
    type Value string
    type Lookup map[Key]Value

### Return Parameters

#### Return Parameters: Recommendation

1.  When deciding if a function or method should return an argument by
    value or pointer, returning a value SHOULD be your default position
    except in the following situations, in which case it is RECOMMENDED
    to return a pointer to a value:
    a.  the API contract you want to establish with the caller is to
        force them to deal with errors by returning `nil` AND the
        construction of the zero-value is onerous or expensive (i.e.
        return `""` for a string).
    b.  ownership of the variable may change throughout the course of
        the variable's life.
    c.  the expense of copying the variable is measurable.

#### Return Parameters: Rationale

Go uses pass-by-value semantics and employs [variable escape
analysis](http://www.agardner.me/golang/garbage/collection/gc/escape/analysis/2015/10/18/go-escape-analysis.html).

Embrace the pass-by-value nature of Go, be productive, and let the
compiler do work for you.

-   [When to use string
    pointers](https://dhdersch.github.io/golang/2016/01/23/golang-when-to-use-string-pointers.html)
-   [Go Data Structures](https://research.swtch.com/godata)
-   [Go Slices: usage and
    internals](https://blog.golang.org/go-slices-usage-and-internals)
-   [Arrays, slices (and strings): The mechanics of
    'append'](https://blog.golang.org/slices)
-   [Using Pointers in
    Golang](https://groups.google.com/forum/#!msg/golang-nuts/3SBKSFRVbWA/IArLsJi-xV4J)

Much of the above reading was shamelessly borrowed from a [Stack
Overflow
article](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/20849911/move-semantics-in-golang#20856597)
which is a good read on its own merits.

### Interface Receivers

#### Interface Receivers: Recommendation

1.  When deciding if a receiver should be a value or a pointer, a
    pointer SHOULD be used by default except in the following
    situations, in which case it is RECOMMENDED to use a value:
    a.  the value of the receiver is a simple underlying type (i.e. an
        `int`)
    b.  invocation of the given interface method SHOULD result in a copy
        of the receiver.

#### Interface Receivers: Rationale

This is simple: use a pointer to a receiver in nearly all cases. Item
`1b` is very rare in practice.

    type Foo struct {
      bar string
    }

    // Baz assigns "bur" to f.bar.  Without the pointer, this the instance of Foo
    // would have been copied and the assignment would have been not visible to
    // the caller (a nice source of frustration when first learning Go).
    func (f *Foo) Baz() {
      f.bar = "bur"
    }

In practice, use of non-pointer receivers is limited to the following
example:

    type MyEnum int

    func (e MyEnum) String() string {
      switch e {
      case 0:
        return "zero"
      case 1:
        return "one"
      default:
        return "something not one or zero"
      }
    }

    var myEnum MyEnum = 0
    fmt.Println("%s", myEnum)

Where the important takeaway is that in `String()`, it doesn't matter if
the value is copied.

### `const`

#### `const`: Recommendation

1.  Use of `const` is RECOMMENDED.
2.  Create explicitly typed `const` 's is RECOMMENDED.
3.  `const`s with type information SHOULD should be exported (both the
    `type` and the `const` values).
4.  Periodically using static analysis checks like
    [goconst](https://github.com/jgautheron/goconst) is RECOMMENDED but
    OPTIONAL.

#### `const`: Rationale

By creating a `const`, you give the Go tooling an identifier which you
can search for referrers of the given `const`. See the `referrers`
section of the [Using Guru](http://golang.org/s/using-guru) document
(this document SHOULD be \_required\_ reading).

### Bitmasks

#### Bitmasks: Recommendation

1.  Bitmasks SHOULD be created using `const` and `iota`.
2.  Bitmasks SHOULD be explicitly typed.
3.  The meaning of bits in a bitmask MAY change if it is documented in
    the interface that the meaning of individual bits may change.
4.  The meaning of bits MUST NOT change if the bitmask is exported and
    the position of individual bits is part of the contract.
5.  A new type, removal of the bitmask as a type, or other form of
    compile-time breakage MUST be introduced in order to communicate the
    change in behavior.
6.  Manual manipulation of bitmasks SHOULD NOT be performed without
    explicitly named bits.

#### Bitmasks: Rationale

Go provides a convenient trick to automatically creating bitmasks:

    type MyBitmask int

    const (
          FlagA MyBitmask = 1 << iota
          FlagB
          FlagC
          FlagD
    )

Leverage this trick.

### Documentation

#### Documentation: Recommendation

1.  Projects MUST use `godoc(1)`\_ to document their project.

#### Documentation: Rationale

Read the [Godoc: documenting Go
code](https://blog.golang.org/godoc-documenting-go-code) blog post.

### Context

#### Context: Recommendation

1.  Projects MUST the [context](https://golang.org/pkg/context/) pattern
    for passing state along request-scoped state information (e.g.
    `deadlines`, `cancelation signals`, or request-specific
    information).

#### Context: Rationale

Read the [Go Concurrency Patterns:
Context](https://blog.golang.org/context) blog post.

### gRPC

#### gRPC: Recommendation

1.  gRPC\_ SHOULD be preferred as the RPC framework for communicating
    between discrete Go processes locally or on the network.
2.  JSON MAY be used as the RPC framework when necessary to interoperate
    with non-gRPC\_ clients.

#### gRPC: Rationale

Read the [Go Concurrency Patterns:
Context](https://blog.golang.org/context) blog post.

[^1]: Starting in Go 1.8, `go(1)`\_ defaulted to `$HOME/go` as its
    default `GOPATH`. It is not strictly necessary to set `GOPATH`,
    however it is still advised to make this implicit default explicit.
    Many tools or pieces of software test for the environment variable
    `GOPATH` instead of using using `go env GOPATH`.

[^2]: Tools similar to [bazel](https://bazel.build/) could influence
    this recommendation in the future however there are no plans to
    augment the workflow presented by the `go(1)`\_ tool.

[^3]: Monorepos can be justified by either their productivity gains, by
    [Parkinson's law](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Parkinson%27s_law),
    or by blurring bluring the natural organizational lines stemming
    from [Conway's law](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Conway%27s_law) by
    embracing the egalitarian nature of software.

[^4]: `clang-format(1)`\_ SHOULD be considered for C and C++ codebases
    alike. [clang-format - Automatic formatting for
    C/C++](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=s7JmdCfI__c) and [code::dive
    2016 conference – Chandler Carruth – Making C++ easier, faster and
    safer (part 1)](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cX_GhJ6BuWI&t=1605).

