----
authors: Pedro Palazón Candel <pedro@joyent.com>, Trent Mick <trent@joyent.com>
contributors: Robert Mustacchi <rm@joyent.com>, Joshua Clulow <jclulow@joyent.com>
state: draft
----

<!--
    This Source Code Form is subject to the terms of the Mozilla Public
    License, v. 2.0. If a copy of the MPL was not distributed with this
    file, You can obtain one at http://mozilla.org/MPL/2.0/.
-->

<!--
    Copyright 2015 Joyent Inc.
-->

# RFD 3 SDC Compute Nodes Reboot

## Introduction

A new `sdcadm experimental reboot-plan` collection of commands (unpromised
interface) for working towards controlled and safe reboots of selected
servers in a typical SDC setup.

One of the least specified and hardest parts of SDC upgrades right now is
managing the reboots of CNs and the headnode safely. In particular:

- controlling reboots of the "core" servers (those with SDC core components,
  esp. the HA binders and manatees)
- reasonably helpful tooling for rebooting (subsets of) the other servers in a
  DC: rolling reboots, reboot rates

The list of desired subcommands should be able to handle:

- Creation (and eventually queue) of a new reboot plan
- Check status of currently queued/in-progress reboot plan
- Historical details of reboot plans already executed


## Terminology

### How is a server reboot executed in SDC?

In order to reboot a SDC server, we execute the following CNAPI request

    sdc-cnapi /servers/<UUID>/reboot -X POST

which will result in the creation of a reboot job (whose `uuid` is retrieved
as part of the request).

### What the reboot job does?

The reboot job will send the server the reboot message (`exit 113`) and
set the server's `transitional_status` property to `rebooting`.

Note that the job does not wait for reboot completion.

### How is checked server reboot completion?

`sdc-server list` is the most widely We check for server reboot completion
looking at the value of the `status` property of the CNAPI's server object.
Obviously, this requires CNAPI to be up and running, and this approach cannot
be used when, for example, we reboot a server holding a manatee's shard primary
member.

On this case - and in general, on any case involving a CN hosting a manatee
shard member, the better way to poll for server reboot completion is by
looking at the manatee shard state itself using `manatee-adm show` from any
of the other manatee shard members.

## Reboot plan

It has been proposed to use a **"reboot plan"** similar to the _upgrade
plans_ already generated by `sdcadm`. This plan will contain the following
information:

- name of reboot plan (optional)
- start time for reboot plan (could be immediate at first pass)
- list of servers to reboot (uuids)
- maximum number of servers that can be offline at once
- maximum time each server should be offline before an alarm is triggered
- state of the reboot plan. One of `created`, `stopped`, `running`, `canceled`,
  `complete`,  perhaps others. ...

At the moment of the creation of the reboot plan, the UUID that identifies
the reboot plan as it's stored will be generated, in a way that we can refer
to the reboot plan in the future.

The reboot plan should also store historical data about how long each server
was offline, so that we can make better estimates of downtime in future plans.

This will be done individually for each server, in a way that dealing with
many servers - order of 1000s - will be possible, and simplify results updates
for completion of the reboot of each server.


## Execution of the reboot plan

Execution of the reboot plan consists into the creation of the plan, queuing
of the different servers reboot at the provided concurrency, and the
verification of the server reboot, either through CNAPI for servers not hosting
core SDC components, or through a manatee instance for servers hosting core
components.

### Creation, modification and retrieval of the reboot plan information:

The creation of the plan will consist into a POST request to a given API
end-point (`POST /reboot-plans`), which will result into a
`201 Created` response, together with the plan UUID.

Subsequent retrievals of the plan will be done using `GET /reboot-plans/<uuid>`

Updates of the reboot plan by the process executing it could be done using
`PUT /reboot-plans/<uuid>`.

Logical storage for these plans seems to be Moray through CNAPI, given it is
the application in charge of anything related to Servers. This has the drawback
of updating the plan started/finished members for core servers when Manatee is
down but, for the case of these core servers, given we would make the reboot
sequentially, we could update both, `started_at` and `finished_at` for any of the
CNs if we wait for manatee shard availability for these CNs.

### Execution of the plan

Execution of the reboot plan needs to be driven on a way that a failure or
interruption on the process running the plan will not cause the plan to
be incomplete.

Therefore, the process in charge of creating/running reboot plans will first
check for the existence of a reboot plan whose `state` isn't "finished", and
continue with that one or, optionally, ask the user to cancel such plan before
attempting the execution of a new one (TBD).

Once the new plan is created, this process will begin either with the reboot
of the first core server, when dealing with CNs hosting SDC core components,
or with the reboot of the first batch of CNs not hosting core components.

The process will first check `Workflow API` to verify that the reboot jobs
have been successfully created and executed, and then will poll either `CNAPI`
for reboot status of CNs, or use `manatee-adm` to check for the state of
the manatee SDC shard when rebooting CNs with core components.

This routine will be repeated until all the CNs hosting SDC core members have
been rebooted, or until we complete the reboot of all the CNs not hosting SDC
core instances, at the provided concurrency.

As especified above, every time a server reboot has been completed, the process
will update the reboot plan object using `PUT` requests to the reboot plan URI.

## Reboot of servers hosting core and non core components

CNs with core components need to be rebooted before any other CNs, and
using a sequence stablished by manatee's shard administration. The main
problem would be to keep track of the reboot of these core CNs in terms of
how long it took to reboot each one of these nodes and, of course, if we
drive such CNs from the `sdcadm` process itself, we will not be able to
_schedule_ reboot of CNs hosting core SDC components. Which I'd say has sense,
since a failure in the reboot of these CNs will likely compromise the state
of the whole SDC setup and, therefore, should be an attended operation.

The proposed solution is to always reboot first `CNs` hosting any SDC core
component - even if those are not members of a manatee shard, or binder's
cluster of ZooKeepers - for example, an imgapi instance.

Reasoning: In many cases we will be running the reboot plan right after core
service upgrades. It would be nice to get out of maint soon and get to _"the
system itself is up to latest"_, you can now reboot non-core CNs at leisure.

## Which process should be in charge of executing the reboot plan

### Option 1: CNAPI

Given that the reboot plan should also handle reboots of the "core" servers,
we'll need to add a bunch of `manatee-adm` related logic - already present at
`sdcadm` code base - to CNAPI.

CNAPI itself is _manatee's dependent_ and trying to handle reboots of the
CNs hosting manatee's shard members could give us problems. In fact, the way
we use to check for a successful reboot of core CNs is checking the status
of the manatee shard from one of the available shard members, while we check
the availability of the non-core CNs rebooted using CNAPI (and manatee).

At the moment, CNAPI doesn't have any code useful to deal with schedule of
the execution of a reboot plan or anything else. It's merely the HTTP server
process.

Additionaly, eventual HA of CNAPI would make multiple instances to have to
elect a leader here, which also make us to lean against this option.

## Option 2: Workflow Runner

In order to make possible to make a choice on the execution time of a reboot
plan, we could possibly use node-workflow, and create a job with the servers
to be rebooted. There would be a workflow, which could be used by CNAPI in
order to _"queue"_ the reboot of the selected servers. It would receive the
servers to be rebooted and the desired time to begin with the plan execution
as arguments. It could even poll the servers for successful reboot and
eventually fire an alarm when the reboot takes too long.

Currently, worklfow is unable to run parallel tasks and we should drive the
concurrent reboot of CNs through a monolithic workflow task.

It also has the drawback that any outage of wf-runner or moray would result
into the workflow job being cancelled before the wf-runner process is
restarted.

## Option 3: SdcAdm

`sdcadm` itself should be able to drive the process if we make sure we add
the subcommands in charge to create the reboot processes the ability to check
if there's a reboot command not yet finished for the cases when the `sdcadm`
process exits during the course of the reboot process.

It's to say, if we issue `sdcadm reboot --concurrency=10` into a SDC
setup with 30 servers, and the `sdcadm` process exits in the middle of the
reboots, we should make sure that the next invocation of this command,
**wathever the provided arguments** would result into the ability to ask the
user about a reboot plan not yet finished, and the desire of not of **resume**
such reboot plan, or just flag it as finished and beging a new one.

The main drawback of this approach would be that it wouldn't be able to `queue`
the execution of the reboot plan, and it would need to be executed immediately.

## Option 4: New sdcadm-rebooter service, running into HN Gz

Another option to adress this `queue` problem could be to create a new sdcadm
related service, which would be in charge of execute the reboot processes,
instead of doing such thing straight from `sdcadm` CLI at the moment of typing
the command.

Having an idling node process wasting memory when there is no reboot-plan
doesn't sound like the better possible idea. Instead, we could have a transient
service which only lives for as long as it takes to find a current reboot plan
and run it. `sdcadm reboot-plan run` could start it at the moment that a new
reboot plan is created. And being a transient service would make possible for
it to re-attach to an existing reboot plan after a reboot of the Headnode, once
the core services have come up.

### Failure handling

A failure on the reboot of one or more nodes included into a reboot plan should
make the whole plan to fail or, at least, to to report that the reboot of these
nodes failed, and allow the operator to choose if continue is really an option,
or the remaining reboot plan should be canceled.

Maybe the reason for the failure(s) of one ore more nodes (when reboots happen
concurrently) is that a platform image won't boot, and we don't want to attempt
reboots of more CNs using it.


# Proposal for reboot coordination and the CLI

Scenario A: 1 HN, 9 CNs (2 core, 7 non-core). Rebooting everything.

(Will skip the "experimental" part in examples).

    $ sdcadm reboot-plan --help
    ... help output ...
    Commands:
        create      Create a reboot plan.
        run         Execute/continue the reboot plan.
        status      Show status of the current reboot plan.
        watch       Watch (and wait for) the current running reboot plan.
        stop        Stop execution of the current (running) reboot plan.
        cancel      Cancel the current reboot plan.


Create the reboot plan:

    $ sdcadm reboot-plan create --all -W
    Warning: The following servers will reboot without a platform change
    (use '--skip-current' to exclude servers already on target boot platform):
        $server_hostname ($server_uuid)
        ...

    Warning: The following servers will reboot with a platform *downgrade*:
        $server_hostname ($server_uuid)
        ...

    Created reboot plan $uuid (10 servers, max concurrency 3):
        Reboot headnode: platform $platold1 -> $platnew1
        Reboot 2 core servers: platform $platold2 -> $platnew1
        Reboot 4 servers: platform $platold3 -> $platnew1
        Reboot 1 server: platform $platold2 -> $platnew2
        ...

Notes:
- The summary shows a separate line for each ($old, $new) platform
  tuple. A single line for each server is (a) too much and (b) less useful.
- Warnings about possible mistakes are highlighted. After all warnings are
  emitted, this errors out. Use '-W,--ignore-warnings' to still create
  the reboot plan. Other specific option to workaround specific warnings.

Run the plan and optionally `--wait` for it to complete (with progress
info). *Optionally* can given the reboot-plan UUID (to guard against another
operator slipping in a different plan).

    # Usage: sdcadm reboot-plan run [--wait] [--yes] [UUID]
    $ sdcadm reboot-plan run --wait
    This will run a plan to reboot 10 servers (rebooting a maximum of 3
    servers at a time). Details:
        Reboot headnode (platform $platold1 -> $platnew1)
        Reboot 2 core servers (platform $platold2 -> $platnew1)
        Reboot 4 servers (platform $platold3 -> $platnew1)
        Reboot 1 servers (platform $platold2 -> $platnew2)
        ...

        Warning: This plan includes a reboot of the headnode, which will
            terminate this login session. Reboots will *continue*. Use
            `sdcadm reboot-plan watch` to re-attach after the headnode
            reboots.

    Would you like to continue? [y/N] y

    Running reboot plan $uuid (use `sdcadm reboot-plan watch` to re-attach)
    ...

This is where sdcadm hands off to the equivalent off `sdcadm reboot-plan watch`.
We get a progress bar and status messages for the plan:

    ...
    Reboot plan $uuid  [=====>                    ]  $progbar_stuff

Progress messages, for core servers. Note: I'm proposing here that 'sdcadm
reboot-plan run' not consider moving on from a core zone until all core
services are up on that server.

    ...
    Rebooting core server $hostname: platform $current_platform -> $boot_platform
    Rebooted core server $hostname: $start - $end (3m10s)
    Wait for core services to come online on server $hostname

Progress messages, for non-core servers:

    ...
    Rebooting server $hostname: platform $current_platform -> $boot_platform
    Rebooted server $hostname: $start - $end (3m10s)

When complete:

    ...
    Completed reboot plan $uuid (rebooted 10 servers in 1h20m15s)

Ctrl+C'ing doesn't stop the reboots. That might not be clear to a user trying
to cancel part way through. So we should trap that and try to be clear:

    ...
    Running reboot plan $uuid (use `sdcadm reboot-plan watch` to re-attach)
    Reboot plan $uuid  [=====>                    ]  $progbar_stuff
    ^C
    Stopped watching reboot plan $uuid
    **Note: The reboot plan is still running! Use `sdcadm reboot-plan stop`
    to stop it.**

Done!

The other commands (see the 'sdcadm reboot-plans -h' output above)
are self-explanatory for now

## Affected APIs.


- CNAPI gets two buckets to store reboot plan info:

        bucket cnapi_reboot_plans
            uuid (UUID)
            concurrency (Number)
            state (String)          # Note not "execution" please.
                                    # Values are: "created", "stopped",
                                    #   "running", "canceled", "complete".
                                    #   Perhaps others.
            ...

        bucket cnapi_reboots
            reboot_plan (UUID)      # or "reboot_plan_uuid" if we want to keep using that pattern
            server_uuid (UUID)
            server_hostname (String)  # maybe include this to make it nicer for reporting
            started_at              # debatable on naming and how to store date for timestamps
            finished_at             #    name: started_at vs started vs started_timestamp
                                    #    type: integer ms vs toISOString()
            job_uuid (UUID)
            ...

  The reason for two buckets it to be able to cope with many many servers,
  e.g. on the order of 1000s.

- New CNAPI endpoints to control this:

        RebootPlanCreate (POST /reboot-plans)
        RebootPlanGet (GET /reboot-plans/:uuid)
        RebootPlanGetActive (GET /reboot-plans/active)
        RebootPlanUpdate (PUT /reboot-plans/:uuid)

- Modify CNAPI `/servers/<uuid>/reboot` to accept `?reboot_plan=$reboot_plan_uuid`
  argument, used to initialize the reboot job for servers when there's a reboot
  plan in progress, and prevent the failure response which otherwise the reboot
  end-point would return as part of the mechanism to prevent manual reboots
  while the reboot plan is in progress.

- `sdcadm` gets a new sub-class to handle all the `RebootPlan CLI` associated
  set of sub-commands.

- The new `sdcadm-rebooter` transient service needs to be added to `sdcadm` too

- Server selection can be done using `sdc-server lookup`, as it's done for other
  sdcadm sub-commands.

      [root@headnode (coal) ~]# sdcadm experimental reboot help core
      Reboots Compute Nodes hosting manatee shard instances.

      Usage:
           sdcadm reboot-plan create [ -a ] [ -c ] [ -o ] [ -h ] [-n ] [ -y ] \
           [ -W ] [ -s ] [ -r ] [SERVER] [SERVER]...

      Options:
          -y, --yes             Answer yes to all confirmations.
          -h, --help            Show this help.
          -n, --dry-run         Go through the motions without actually rebooting.
          -r INT, --rate=INT    Number of servers to reboot simultaneously. Default: 5.
          -W,--ignore-warnings  Create the reboot plan despite of emiting warnings for
                                servers already on the target platform (or other
                                warnings).
          -s, --skip-current    Use it to skip reboot of servers already on target
                                boot platform.

      Server selection:
        -c, --core              Reboot the servers with SDC core components.
                                Note that this will include the headnode.
        -o, --non-core          Reboot the servers without SDC core
                                components.
        -a, --all               Reboot all the servers.

      (Maybe add an option to allow skipping headnode reboot?)

      Use "--all" to reboot all the non-core setup servers or pass a specific set
      of SERVERs. A "SERVER" is a server UUID or hostname. In a larger datacenter,
      getting a list of the wanted servers can be a chore. The
      "sdc-server lookup ..." tool is useful for this.

      Examples:

          # Reboot all non-core servers.
          sdcadm reboot-plan create --non-core

          # Reboot non-core setup servers with the "pkg=aegean" trait.
          sdcadm reboot-plan create \
              $(sdc-server lookup setup=true traits.pkg=aegean | xargs)

          # Reboot non-core setup servers, excluding those with a "internal=PKGSRC" trait.
          sdcadm reboot-plan create \
              $(sdc-server lookup setup=true 'traits.internal!~PKGSRC' | xargs)


## extras

Some extra work which should be a part of this RFD.  We might want to
prioritize these and do only some of them.

1. DAPI should prefer rebooted servers.
   While we are rolling reboots across a chunk of the fleet, it would be nice to
   be able to bring the DC out of maint as soon as possible. We might want to do
   this after a subset of all the DCs servers are rebooted. It would then be
   nice if DAPI would prefer already rebooted servers. I think it should be a
   soft preference only.

2. Avoid rebooting servers with active CNAPI tasks or "inflight" provisions.
   We should avoid rebooting a CN while there is a CNAPI task running on that
   CN or an "inflight" provision assigned to that CN. Are there long-running
   tasks that we should ignore? E.g. a hanging provision? a super long image
   creation? Is there an active CNAPI task for a `docker logs -f`? If there is a
   conflict, the API/CLI should report those and give the operator an override.
   This logic could be handled in the CNAPI ServerReboot endpoint.

3. Consider a need for a way to "drain" a server.
   What if there are constant tasks coming to a server (e.g. someone
   snapshotting or restarting vms constantly)... it would be nice to have a
   per-server way to drain tasks from it. I think we probably don't need/want
   this complexity right now.

4. When going through planned reboots... should we take note of the
   current_platform at creation time, and compare at reboot time. If they
   don't match... then consider options. It may have been manually rebooted
   already. Perhaps warn, skip it. 'state=skipped'.

5. I'd like if CNAPI "/reboot-plans/$plan" supported a short uuid (e.g. the
   first chunk) natively. That would allow us to use the short uuid prefix
   in status messages.

6. CNAPI's ServerReboot check for active reboot-plan. If there is one, it bails
   if ServerReboot wasn't given the UUID. I.e. guard against manual reboots
   during a running reboot-plan.

7. Are there other warnings that `sdcadm reboot-plan create` should include?
   Ask ops/support what might surprise. E.g. warn on unsetup CNs? CNs that are
   down? CNs in any state other than "setup"?

8. Get a one-liner:

        sdcadm reboot-plan create --all --run --wait

   which should mostly just be `create` handing off to `run` handing off to
   `wait`.

9. Consider what a *manual* reboot process could be. I.e. Say the operator wants
   to have the last word on when to reboot the next box. Instead of
   `sdcadm reboot-plan run` (or additionally to), we could have
   `sdcadm reboot-plan step` or `next` (like a debugger) to have it do the next
   step. This would confirm the next step:

        $ sdcdm reboot-plan next
        Reboot plan $uuid (10 servers, max concurrency 3)
        Next step: reboot 3 servers
            server $hostname1: $current_platform -> $boot_platform
            server $hostname2: $current_platform -> $boot_platform
            server $hostname3: $current_platform -> $boot_platform

        Would you like to continue? [y/N]

   and so on, until complete.

10. Add support for handling a (non-core) server that takes too long to reboot.
    With the current plan, i.e. doing nothing, we'd end up rebooting all the
    other servers, and polling endlessly for that last server to come up.
    Might be the same behaviour if Ur crashes on that server.
    Better might be to stop reboots of other servers if hitting that issue,
    e.g. what if a new platform image won't boot. Naively we could wipe out
    the entire DC.

11. What to do if core services don't come back on a core server.
    If it takes a long time to (manually) get those services back up... how
    surprised will we be if reboots then start happening again? Should
    that process go stale after, say, an hour? Should one be able to see
    that a reboot-plan is active even when core systems are down? E.g.
    sdcadm could have a cache of latest known state in is /var area even if
    manatee is down (because of a manatee server update gone wrong).

12. Consider starting the long wanted `sdcadm status` to give a quick status
    of the DC. Near the top of the list should be:
        - currently in maint?
        - is there a reboot plan running?


## Implementation Details

### cn-agent

- Needs a way to keep track of currently in progress tasks.
- Needs to provide a mechanism to stop accepting new tasks until a new order is
  given. This could be used by `update_agent` task, which isn't currently
  checking if the execution of the `self-update` task would mean the
  interruption of any other tasks in progress.
  Right now, neither server reboot or self update cn-agent care at all
  about in progress tasks.

Both could be new tasks, as follows:

- `tasks_in_progress`
- `pause_task_handler`
- `resume_task_handler`

"In progress" tasks could be just saved in memory, together with a counter.

Additionally, the missing 'show_tasks' task should be added in order to fix
the already documented CNAPI end-point
`ServerTaskHistory (GET /servers/:server_uuid/task-history)`, which is
returning internal error exception now.

### CNAPI

- Provide end-point to report running tasks for a given server
  `GET /servers/:server_uuid/running-tasks`.
- Create cnapi_reboot_plans and cnapi_reboots moray's buckets.
- Create models for aforementioned buckets.
- Modify `POST /servers/:server_uuid/reboot` to accept an optional
  `reboot_plan=$reboot_plan_uuid` argument.
- Modify `POST /servers/:server_uuid/reboot` to return an error
  response (`409 Conflict`) for the case somebody attempts a reboot
  of a server currently included into a reboot_plan in progress.
- Modify `POST /servers/:server_uuid/reboot` in a way that it will wait
  for all the tasks being run by the server's cn-agent before really
  sending the reboot.
  Could be done by modifying the workflow to include a call to
  `pause_task_handler` as its first step, then include calls to
  `tasks_in_progress` until we get a zero length response. This would require
  end-point also for "pause_task_handler", since the only way for workflow
  to do such thing is through CNAPI end-points, cannot talk straight to
  CN.
- Provide `GET /reboot-plans` end-point to make possible for ops to get
  a list of reboot plans.
- Provide `POST /reboot-plans` end-point to support creation of a new reboot
  plan.
- Provide `GET /reboot-plans/:reboot_plan_uuid` to get details of the given
  reboot plan.
- Provide `PUT /reboot-plans/:reboot_plan_uuid` to allow updates of the reboot
  plan. Different actions like "stop", "run/continue" or "next" if we implement
  the step based execution are required. We can also choose to implement these
  using different end-points instead, like
  `POST /reboot-plans/:reboot_plan_uuid/run` (TBD).

### sdcadm

- New RebootPlan CLI class, including sub-commands for: `create`, `run`,
  `status`, `watch`, `stop`, `cancel` and `next`, if we decide to go ahead with
  implementation of execution of the reboot plan in steps requiring
  confirmation.
- New sdcadm-rebooter HN GZ service, including transient SMF manifest, and the
  required modifications to allow re-use of shared logic between this service
  and the sdcam CLI.
- Logic to figure out "core" servers, manatee's shard mgmt. (shared with
  `sdcadm up manatee`), ...
