.\"
.\" This file and its contents are supplied under the terms of the
.\" Common Development and Distribution License ("CDDL"), version 1.0.
.\" You may only use this file in accordance with the terms of version
.\" 1.0 of the CDDL.
.\"
.\" A full copy of the text of the CDDL should have accompanied this
.\" source.  A copy of the CDDL is also available via the Internet at
.\" http://www.illumos.org/license/CDDL.
.\"
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2017, Joyent, Inc.
.\"
.Dd July 24, 2017
.Dt MAC_RING_INFO 9S
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm mac_ring_info ,
.Nm mac_ring_info_t
.Nd MAC ring information structure
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/mac_provider.h
.Sh INTERFACE STABILITY
.Sy Evolving -
This interface is still evolving.
API and ABI stability is not guaranteed.
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Vt mac_ring_info_t
structure is used by the MAC framework as part of the
.Dv MAC_CAPAB_RINGS
capability.
For more background on the MAC framework, please see
.Xr mac 9E .
.Pp
When a device driver declares that it supports the
.Dv MAC_CAPAB_RINGS
cpability and fills out the structure as described in
.Xr mac_capab_rings 9E ,
it indicates that it supports a number of rings for transmitting and
receiving.
.Sh TYPES
The following types define the function pointers in use in the
.Vt mac_ring_info_t
structure.
.Bd -literal -offset indent
typedef int     (*mac_ring_start_t)(mac_ring_driver_t, uint64_t);
typedef void    (*mac_ring_stop_t)(mac_ring_driver_t);

typedef mblk_t  *(*mac_ring_send_t)(mac_ring_driver_t, mblk_t *);
typedef mblk_t  *(*mac_ring_poll_t)(mac_ring_driver_t, int);

typedef int     (*mac_ring_stat_t)(mac_ring_driver_t, uint_t, uint64_t *);
.Ed
.Sh STRUCTURE MEMBERS
.Bd -literal -offset indent
uint_t			mri_extensions;
uint_t                  mri_flags;
mac_ring_driver_t	mri_driver;
mac_ring_start_t        mri_start;
mac_ring_stop_t         mri_stop;
mac_intr_t              mri_intr;
mac_ring_send_t 	mri_tx;
mac_ring_poll_t 	mri_poll;
mac_ring_stat_t         mri_stat;
.Ed
.Pp
The
.Fa mri_extensions
member is used to negotiate extensions between the MAC framework and the
device driver.
The MAC framework will set the value of
.Fa mri_extensions
to include all of the currently known extensions.
The driver should intersect this list with the set that the driver
supports.
At this time, no such features are defined and the driver should set
this member to
.Sy 0 .
.Pp
The
.Fa mri_flags
member is used to indicate various additional capabilities supported by
the ring.
Currently, no flags are defined and the device driver should set it to
.Sy 0 .
.Pp
The
.Fa mri_driver
member should be set to a driver-specific value that represents the data
structure that corresponds to the ring.
The driver will receive this value in all of the callback functions that
are defined in this structure.
.Pp
The
.Fa mri_start
member is a required entry point that is used to start the ring.
While the device driver may not need to do any work with hardware to
start the use of the ring, it must record the ring's generation number.
For more information, see
.Xr mri_start 9E .
.Pp
The
.Fa mri_stop
member is an optional entry point that will be called when the ring is
being stopped.
For more information, see
.Xr mri_stop 9E .
.Pp
The
.Fa mri_intr
member contains information about the interrupt associated with the
ring.
For more information on filling it out, see
.Xr mac_intr 9S .
.Pp
The
.Fa mri_tx
member should only be set on transmit rings.
It must not be set on receive rings.
The
.Fa mri_tx
member should be set to a function that will transmit a given frame on
the specified ring.
For more information, see
.Xr mri_tx 9E .
.Pp
The
.Fa mri_poll
member should only be set on receive rings.
It must not be set on transmit rings.
The
.Fa mri_poll
member should be set to a function which will poll the specified ring.
For more information, see
.Xr mri_poll 9E .
.Pp
The
.Fa mri_stat
member should be set to a function which will retrieve statistics about
the specified ring.
For more information, see
.Xr mri_stat 9E .
.Ss Required Members
All non-function members are required.
The
.Fa mri_intr
member must be a properly filled out as per
.Xr mac_intr 9S .
.Pp
For transmit rings, the
.Fa mri_tx
member is required.
.Pp
For receive rings, the
.Fa mri_poll
member is required.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr mac 9E ,
.Xr mac_capab_rings 9E ,
.Xr mri_poll 9E ,
.Xr mri_start 9E ,
.Xr mri_stat 9E ,
.Xr mri_stop 9E ,
.Xr mri_tx 9E ,
.Xr mac_intr 9S
