.\"
.\" This file and its contents are supplied under the terms of the
.\" Common Development and Distribution License ("CDDL"), version 1.0.
.\" You may only use this file in accordance with the terms of version
.\" 1.0 of the CDDL.
.\"
.\" A full copy of the text of the CDDL should have accompanied this
.\" source.  A copy of the CDDL is also available via the Internet at
.\" http://www.illumos.org/license/CDDL.
.\"
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2017, Joyent, Inc.
.\"
.Dd July 26, 2017
.Dt MGI_START 9E
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm mgi_start ,
.Nm mgi_stop
.Nd Start and stop a MAC group
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/mac_provider.h
.Ft int
.Fo prefix_group_start
.Fa "mac_group_driver_t gh"
.Fc
.Ft void
.Fo prefix_group_stop
.Fa "mac_group_driver_t gh"
.Fc
.Sh INTERFACE LEVEL
.Sy Evolving -
This interface is still evolving.
API and ABI stability is not guaranteed.
.Sh PARAMETERS
.Bl -tag -width Fa
.It Fa driver
A pointer to the ring's private data that was passed in via the
.Vt mgi_driver
member of the
.Xr mac_group_info 9S
structure as part of the
.Xr mr_gget 9E
entry point.
.El
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Fn mgi_start
and
.Fn mgi_stop
are optional entry points that allow a chance for the device driver to
do anything that it needs to do to start and stop a group respectively.
The group that is being operated on is identified by
.Fa gh .
.Sh RETURN VALUES
Upon successful completion, the
.Fn mgi_start
interface should return
.Sy 0 .
Otherwise, it should return the appropriate error number.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr mac 9E ,
.Xr mac_capab_rings 9E ,
.Xr mr_gget 9E ,
.Xr mac_group_info 9S
