.\"
.\" This file and its contents are supplied under the terms of the
.\" Common Development and Distribution License ("CDDL"), version 1.0.
.\" You may only use this file in accordance with the terms of version
.\" 1.0 of the CDDL.
.\"
.\" A full copy of the text of the CDDL should have accompanied this
.\" source.  A copy of the CDDL is also available via the Internet at
.\" http://www.illumos.org/license/CDDL.
.\"
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2017, Joyent, Inc.
.\"
.Dd July 24, 2017
.Dt MRI_START 9E
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm mri_start ,
.Nm mri_stop
.Nd ring start and stop entry point
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/mac_provider.h
.Ft int
.Fo prefix_ring_start
.Fa "mac_ring_driver_t rh"
.Fa "uint64_t mr_gen"
.Fc
.Ft void
.Fo prefix_ring_stop
.Fa "mac_ring_driver_t rh"
.Fc
.Sh INTERFACE LEVEL
.Sy Evolving -
This interface is still evolving.
API and ABI stability is not guaranteed.
.Sh PARAMETERS
.Bl -tag -width Fa
.It Fa rh
A pointer to the ring's private data that was passed in via the
.Vt mri_driver
member of the
.Xr mac_ring_info 9S
structure as part of the
.Xr mr_rget 9E
entry point.
.It Fa mr_gen
A 64-bit generation number.
.El
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Fn mri_start
entry point is a required entry point that allows the driver a chance to
take any action to start the ring in hardware.
The ring is indicated by the driver's private data structure
structure for the ring:
.Fa rh .
The driver should record the value of
.Fa mr_gen
in its private data structure.
This value is used when receiving data as the argument to the
.Xr mac_ring_rx 9F
function.
For many drivers, the only action that is required is recording the
generation number.
.Pp
The
.Fn mri_stop
entry point is an optional entry point that allows the driver a chance
to take any actions to stop the ring in hardware.
The ring is indicated by its private data structure
.Fa rh .
.Sh RETURN VALUES
Upon successful completion, the device driver should return
.Sy 0
from the
.Fn mri_start
entry point.
Otherwise, they should return anon-zero positive error number to indicate
the error that occurred.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr mac 9E ,
.Xr mac_capab_rings 9E ,
.Xr mr_rget 9E ,
.Xr mac_ring_rx 9F ,
.Xr mac_ring_info 9S
