.\"
.\" This file and its contents are supplied under the terms of the
.\" Common Development and Distribution License ("CDDL"), version 1.0.
.\" You may only use this file in accordance with the terms of version
.\" 1.0 of the CDDL.
.\"
.\" A full copy of the text of the CDDL should have accompanied this
.\" source.  A copy of the CDDL is also available via the Internet at
.\" http://www.illumos.org/license/CDDL.
.\"
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2017, Joyent, Inc.
.\"
.Dd July 26, 2017
.Dt MRI_POLL 9E
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm mri_poll
.Nd Poll a ring for network data
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/mac_provider.h
.Ft mblk_t *
.Fo prefix_ring_poll
.Fa "void *driver"
.Fa "int poll_bytes"
.Fc
.Sh INTERFACE LEVEL
.Sy Evolving -
This interface is still evolving.
API and ABI stability is not guaranteed.
.Sh PARAMETERS
.Bl -tag -width Fa
.It Fa driver
A pointer to the ring's private data that was passed in via the
.Vt mri_driver
member of the
.Xr mac_ring_info 9S
structure as part of the
.Xr mr_rget 9E
entry point.
.It Fa poll_bytes
The maximum number of bytes that the driver should poll in a given call.
.El
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Fn mri_poll
entry point is called by the MAC framework when it wishes to have the
driver check the ring specified by
.Fa driver
for available data.
.Pp
The device driver should perform the same logic that it would when it's
procesing an interrupt and as described in the
.Sx Receiving Data
section of
.Xr mac 9E .
The main difference is that instead of calling
.Xr mac_ring_rx 9E ,
it should instead return that data.
Also, while an interrupt may map to more than one ring, the driver
should only process the ring indicated by
.Fa driver .
.Pp
Drivers should exercise caution with the locking between the polling,
interrupt disabling routines, and the interrupt handler.
This lock is generally scoped to a receive ring and is used to
synchronize the act of transitioning between polling and handling
interrupts.
That means that in addition to the
.Fn mri_poll
entry point, the
.Xr mi_enable 9E
and
.Xr mi_disable 9E
entry points should synchronize on the same lock when transitioning the
card.
While the driver does not need to hold this lock across the entire
interrupt handler, it should hold it when it is processing and trying to
read frames for the specified ring in its interrupt handler.
.Pp
The driver should limit the number of frames it collects based on the
size value present in the
.Fa poll_bytes
argument.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
Upon successful completion, the device driver should return a message
block chain of collected frames.
If no frames are available, then it should return
.Dv NULL .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr mac 9E ,
.Xr mac_capab_rings 9E ,
.Xr mac_ring_rx 9E ,
.Xr mi_disable 9E ,
.Xr mi_enable 9E ,
.Xr mr_rget 9E ,
.Xr mac_ring_info 9S
