.\"
.\" This file and its contents are supplied under the terms of the
.\" Common Development and Distribution License ("CDDL"), version 1.0.
.\" You may only use this file in accordance with the terms of version
.\" 1.0 of the CDDL.
.\"
.\" A full copy of the text of the CDDL should have accompanied this
.\" source.  A copy of the CDDL is also available via the Internet at
.\" http://www.illumos.org/license/CDDL.
.\"
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2017, Joyent, Inc.
.\"
.Dd Feb 21, 2017
.Dt DDI_UFM_SLOT 9F
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm ddi_ufm_slot ,
.Nm ddi_ufm_slot_set_version
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Ft void
.Fo ddi_ufm_slot_set_version
.Fa "ddi_ufm_slot_t *usp"
.Fa "const char *version"
.Fc
.Ft void
.Fo ddi_ufm_slot_set_attrs
.Fa "ddi_ufm_slot_t *usp"
.Fa "ddi_ufm_attr_t attrs"
.Fc
.Ft void
.Fo ddi_ufm_slot_set_primary
.Fa "ddi_ufm_slot_t *usp"
.Fa "boolean_t isprimary"
.Fc
.Ft void
.Fo ddi_ufm_slot_set_misc
.Fa "ddi_ufm_slot_t *usp"
.Fa "nvlist_t *nvl"
.Fc
.Sh INTERFACE LEVEL
.Sy Evolving -
This interface is evolving still in illumos. API and ABI stability is
not guaranteed.
.Sh PARAMETERS
.Bl -tag -width Fa
.It Fa usp
A pointer to a UFM slot structure that was passed to the driver in its
.Xr ddi_ufm_op_fill_slot 9E
entry point.
.It Fa version
A device-specific ASCII string that indicates the current version of the
firmware image in the slot.
.It Fa attrs
The bitwise-inclusive-OR of one of several attributes of a firmware
slot. See the discussion of the
.Fn ddi_ufm_op_fill_slot
function in
.Xr ddi_ufm 9E .
.It Fa isprimary
A boolean indicating whether or not this slot is the currently active
firmware slot.
.It Fa nvl
An nvlist_t with ancillary, device-specific data.
.El
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Fn ddi_ufm_slot_set_version ,
.Fn ddi_ufm_slot_set_attrs ,
.Fn ddi_ufm_slot_set_primary ,
and
.Fn ddi_ufm_slot_set_misc
functions are used by device drivers to set information about a firmware
slot on the slot structure
.Fa usp
as a part of implementing their
.Xr ddi_ufm_op_fill_slot 9E
entry point. For more information on slots and the use of these
functions, see the description of the
.Fn ddi_ufm_op_fill_slot
function in
.Xr ddi_ufm 9E .
.Pp
The
.Fn ddi_ufm_slot_set_version
function sets the version property of a firmware slot. The version
should be a human-readable ASCII string that describes the current
firmware revision in a way that makes sense to an administrator and
someone who is referencing the documentation of a vendor.
.Pp
The
.Fn ddi_ufm_slot_set_attrs
function describes attributes of a UFM slot. For example, whether the
firmware in the slot can be read or written.
.Pp
The
.Fn ddi_ufm_slot_set_primary
function is used to indicate whether a given slot is the primary or
active slot. If a device only has a single slot, then the driver does
not need to call this function. The slot will always be treated as the
primary in that case.
.Pp
The
.Fn ddi_ufm_slot_set_misc
function is used by the driver to set ancillary key-value data that may
be useful to a consumer. For example, a driver may use this method to
encode specific information that the firmware provides about how or when
it was produced or installed on the device. The driver should create an
nvlist for this purpose with
.Xr nvlist_alloc 9F .
Once the driver passes the nvlist to the
.Fn ddi_ufm_slot_set_misc
function, then the driver must not manipulate or free the nvlist at all.
It is the property of the UFM subsystem.
.Sh CONTEXT
These function should only be called in the context of the
.Xr ddi_ufm_op_fill_slot 9E
entry point. However, these functions may be called from
.Sy kernel
context.
.Sh SEE ALSO
